Some Video Processing Jargon
Let us discuss a few concepts related to videos.

Video Resolution
If you are familiar with YouTube or any other video software, you must know about different types of video resolutions - SD ( Standard Definition ), HD ( High Definition ), UHD or 4K ( Ultra High Definition ).

These are just names given to the resolution ( basically size ) of the video. It is denoted as width x height of the frame. For example,

SD is 640x360 or 720x480
HD is 1280x720 ( also known as 720p)
Full HD is 1920x1080 ( also known as 1080p)
UHD is 3840x2160 ( also known as 4K)
Frame Rate or FPS
A video is a sequence of fast moving images. The frames per second (fps) of a video tells us how fast the image sequence is moving. As the name suggests the fps is the number of frames (images) displayed each second.

So, when someone says that the video has an FPS value of 40, it means that there are 40 images being displayed every second. Alternatively, there is 25 milliseconds gap between successive frames.

Common Video Formats
Let us discuss in brief the two most widely used video formats for writing video files - AVI ( the veteran ) and MP4 ( the youth ).

AVI
AVI stands for Audio Video Interleave and it is a multimedia container format introduced by Microsoft in November 1992. AVI files can contain audio and video data in a file container that allows synchronous audio-with-video playback and supports multiple streaming audio and video. The AVI format is based on the Resource Interchange File Format (RIFF), a container format used to store multimedia data. It is typically less compressed than other formats i.e larger in comparison to more compressed formats.

MP4
MP4 is a file format created by the Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) and it stands for MPEG (Moving Picture Experts Group)-4. It is a modern compression extension to store audio, visual and audio-visual data. Though mp4 comprises of “parts” that range from one to twenty, the one most referred to is mp4 part 2.

The original idea was to make a compression that used a minimal bit-rate. However, with larger companies using mp4 the bit-rate increased and is now synonymous with high quality. The compression decreases screen resolution, effectively decreasing the amount of memory used; making it one of the most common extensions. Mp4 is everywhere- from MP4 videos in university presentations to company advertising films - to be a fit for miscellaneous broadcast platforms flawlessly.

Differences
One big difference between MP4 and AVI is that AVI won't support HEVC/H.265 or VP9 formats. HEVC and VP9 are UHD video codecs. With the support for both codecs, MP4 can hold 4K Ultra HD videos while AVI is only for HD and Full HD files.
Also, AVI can't hold subtitles itself, but it can contain SubRip, SubStation Alpha and XSUB via third-party modification.
Trivia!
Most popular programs that use mp4: Quicktime, itunes
Most popular devices that use mp4: Music/video players, Computers, Cell phones
